hey i'm going to explain a drama
sci-fi thriller film called primer
spoilers ahead
watch out and take care it all starts
with a voice recorder narration by a man
coming from the future
he tells a story of two meticulous
methodical educated yet ambiguous
friends who accidentally discover a
scientific breakthrough that is still
unknown
or perhaps not yet revealed to man it
begins with an argument among four
science engineers who are planning on a
side project for an attempt to create a
device to counter the effects of gravity
the plan is complicated all of them work
day jobs they work 50 hours a week with
an average salary grade they can depend
on
they argue on how much time each should
devote not to mention the funds to
proceed with the plan
as the tension grows they are less
likely to come up with a solution after
spending considerable time squabbling
only ave and aaron are left determined
to take the challenge hey
with a cautious and controlling
personality and aaron a meddlesome and
impulsive kind of guy
begin to plan out their counter
measurements and dealing with the
adversities despite difficulties they
begin their research and experiment in
erin's garage
after identifying the necessary
components for the project due to
financial inadequacy they chop off parts
from existing appliances and take
anything that is needed from their
surroundings
thus creating a legitimate particle
accelerator device a device that uses
electromagnetic fields to propel charged
particles at very high speeds and
energies smashing the charged particles
into its subatomic state
the only thing left now is to acquire a
palladium element it is necessary for
their main approach to discard the
coolant path for the superconductors
because the palladium element can
withstand heat up to 2830 degrees
fahrenheit without altering its chemical
property and form
due to this reason they take the
catalytic converter from abe's car which
contains a small amount of palladium
necessary for their invention
then they take it to a machine shop to
fabricate a palladium steel sheet
covering
after several weeks of meticulously
placing all the parts together they
successfully create the prototype and
are finally ready to put the particle
accelerator to the test
during the test they place a nesting egg
doll inside the machine set up the
necessary scale load 0.5 liters of argon
to the intake and switch the device on
at first the machine seems stable
however as they increase the
electromagnetic field's power the
machine jutters are regularly in short
circuits
they realize that they blew the
batteries after a failed attempt they
decide to call it a day
the next day abe wakes up in a
particularly odd manner seemingly
confused about the present time
aaron calls to meet up with him still
disoriented abe answers his call
after a few seconds aaron picks him up
to bring him back to his garage for a
surprise
inside the garage aaron tells a that he
finally figured out how to stabilize the
machine
aaron installs a regulator to control
the intensity of the electromagnetic
field as he shows aid how to operate the
machine by gradually feeding power until
it reaches its maximum amplitude
as aid shows his astonishment aaron
further explains that by the time the
machine reaches its equilibrium
it creates enough source of energy to
sustain its power on its own just as he
pulls out all the batteries
the discovery leads to another
scientific dilemma they discuss each of
their hypotheses
after several hours of discourse both
seem unable to agree on a certain
conclusion
however what they both agree on is to
keep it to themselves first until
further evidence is gathered
in one event thomas granger father of
abe's girlfriend
shows up as their last best hope of
funding abe takes the task of
quantifying and explaining the device to
granger
as weeks become months their enthusiasm
becomes a slower realization that they
are deep in dense
then one significant and fateful
encounter eve approaches aaron who is
sitting on a bench at the park
taking notes in his notebook aaron is
suspiciously wearing an unobtrusive
earpiece
he asks abe about his whereabouts
because he wasn't able to reach him all
morning
abe strangely answers that he isn't
around aaron doesn't seem to mind his
suspicious response
then abe suddenly gets emotional and
starts to talk about their long
relationship as a friend
acting suspicious he then presented a
proposition to aaron telling him to
follow everything exactly as he says all
throughout the day
then in return he will show him the most
important thing that any living organism
has ever witnessed
abe shows aaron the nesting egg doll
enveloped with protein buildup secreted
by an aspergillus tycho fungus that he
made several experiments with the device
then he brings aaron to a biologist to
explain how they speed up the build-up
processes of proteins and laboratories
the biologist illustrates how they use a
centrifuge to spin the fungus around for
a couple of thousand rotations in a day
as the biologist explains that it takes
about a month to finally see a small
buildup
then abe further explains that the
nesting doll that has accumulated the
amount of buildup for five days inside
their machine tent amounts to the amount
of buildup for six years given normal
conditions
seeing aaron's confusion abe decides to
bring him back to the garage and shows
him the actual experiment instead
first he sets a mechanical watch at 6 00
pm then he places it in the machine
after six minutes they take the watch
out and as they calculate the watches
time advances by 1 347 minutes
age is the same experiment for a digital
watch and it shows identical results
then abe explains the a to b causal loop
side effect the vertices are where the
lines begin and end
the vertices are being represented by
line a and line b while inside the
device where both lines meet two or more
particles that happen to be at the same
point in space at the same time are
allowed to go both forward and backward
in time
to further explain if a subject is
placed inside line a's active magnetic
field
it exits to line b as the magnetic field
and line v deactivates subsequently as
line b's magnetic field activates the
subject immediately exits to line as it
deactivates its magnetic field
overlapping the present time in line b
thus creating a time machine
feeling excited about their discovery
they think of registering for copyright
and publish their device
however aaron thinks of a better plan
but it needs a bigger model that could
fit a person in
his plan is to determine the flow of the
stock market in the present time and use
the invention to go back in the past
invest in winning stocks and earn big in
the stock market as they converge back
into their own timeline
indulged by the idea he begins to refine
his proof of concept as he builds a
larger model for the both of them as
they address each issue they could
possibly encounter during the time warp
after days of modification they finally
move their base operation into a
self-storage unit
after checking all the preparations
ready they begin their first attempt
after traveling six hours into the past
though the attempt was successful they
sick to contemplate on their experience
then they devised an intricate plan for
their big break as abe explains the
proceedings
on the day they first secure both of
their cars one at the facility for their
doubles to use
and the other parked outside from their
doubles line of sight for them the
originals to use when they return
they then step inside the device and
travel another six hours into the past
as they get themselves into the warp
they set their timers to determine the
exact time for them to intervene
they stay isolated in a hotel for a few
hours so as not to interact or interfere
with the outside world while their
doubles are doing their usual routine
as the time finally arrives they start
buying stocks from the highest margin
and are able to succeed on their first
day
then ave and aaron repeat the six-hour
time warp multiple times over multiple
days earning big profits in stock trades
with the help of their future foresight
of the markets performance after
multiple attempts the time travel is
already taxing on abe and aaron's bodies
as the two of them begin to notice
alarming side effects that take the form
of progressive worsening of penmanship
and ear bleeding
then one day as a result of their
inability to cope with the power of the
technological advancement they have in
hand
they question each other about the odds
of their sense of morality the idea has
been spoken and the words wouldn't go
back after they utter it aloud
realizing that there is no real need for
it and no possible real world
application they confirm that there is
no real advantage to gain from it so the
idea of immorality stays
breaking down abe and aaron's close
relationship as days pass their
suspicions grow against each other
whether or not one of them might have
leaked their biggest secret to someone
the tension between the two men comes to
a head when abe decides to pick a losing
investment in the stock market without
aaron's knowledge
abe explains that they need to fail to
avoid suspicions but aaron is seemingly
overly frustrated to understand abe's
better judgment
later that night their dispute is
reinforced after an encounter with
thomas granger who appears inexplicably
two to three days unshaven that is an
overlap with his original self
aaron then tells aid that he saw granger
earlier in the day cleanshaven
getting ready to attend a function with
his wife aaron theorizes that at some
unknown point in the future granger
entered the device with timeline
altering consequences
the permutations are endless from this
they deduce that the problem is
recursive but beyond that they find
themselves admitting defying against the
course of nature
guilty of the alterations of the events
abe goes to the storage room but somehow
advances two more rooms from where their
time machine is stored and opens another
storage room containing another device
that he calls the failsafe device
then he travels into the past going back
four days before the invention of their
time traveling machine
cumulative competing interference wreaks
havoc upon the timeline future apes
sedates original aid so he will never
conduct the initial time travel
experiment
then future aid goes back to where he
approaches original aaron who is sitting
on a bench at the park as he takes notes
in his notebook
this time he intends to dissuade
original aaron but instead he finds
future aaron who has arrived in the
scene first
listening to the pre-recordings of their
past conversations on his unobtrusive
earpiece
as future aaron expresses his intent to
stop him about his plans to sabotage the
first creation of the time travel device
future aid faints at his revelation
overcome by shock and fatigue
future abe wakes up the two men briefly
and tentatively reconcile while they
jointly travel back in time
experiencing and reshaping an event
where abe's girlfriend rachel garner was
nearly killed by a gun wielding party
crasher
after many repetitions now ever
sufficient with knowledge of the party's
events aaron stops the gunman and
becomes a local hero
after the successful alteration aaron
considers a new life in foreign
countries where he can tamper more
broadly on the timelines for personal
gain
while abe states his intent to remain in
town and try to sabotage their original
experiment
even aaron ultimately part ways as
future egg watches over original abe
going to painstaking extremes to keep
him unaware of the future
future aaron on the other hand shares
his knowledge with original aaron by
telling the story of two meticulous
methodical educated yet ambiguous
friends accidentally discover a
scientific breakthrough that is still
unknown
or perhaps not yet revealed to man on a
voice recorder in conclusion as both
and aaron are scientifically
accomplished engineers they are equally
morally and ethically a failure as men
when humanity's greed takes over even by
benefiting the greatest gift one can
receive
they nonetheless become blindsided by it
thinking only for one's personal gain
neglecting the morality of altering
one's former self